tags: #graphic #opengl

previous: [[2. World space]]
next: [[4. Clip space]]

---
> [!important]
> At the end of each vertex shader run, OpenGL exxpects the coordinates to be within a specific range and any coordinate that falls outside this range is *clipped*. Coordinates that are clipped are discarded, so the remaining coordinates will end up as fragments visible on your screen. This is also where *clip space* get its name from

Because specifying all the visible coordinates to be within the range -1.0 and 1.0 isn't really intuitive, we specify our own coordinate set to work in and convert those back to NDC as OpenGL expects then

To transform vertex coordinates from view to clip-space we define a so called *projection matrix* that specifies a range of coordinates e.g -1000 and 1000 in each dimension. The projection matrix then converts coordinates within this specified range to normalized device coordinate (-1.0, 1.0) (not directly, a step called Perspective Division sits in between). All coordinates outside this range will not be mapped between -1.0 and 1.0 and therefore be clipped. with this range we specified in the projection matrix, a coordinate of (1250, 500, 750) would not be visible, since the xx coordinate is out of range and thus gets converted to coordinate higher than 1.0 in NDC and is therefore clipped.

> [!Note]
> Note that if only a part of a primitive e.g. a triangle is outside the clipping volume OpenGL will reconstruct the triangle as one or more triangles to fit inside the clipping range.

This *viewing* box a projection matrix creates is called a **frustum** and each coordinate that ends up insdie this frustum will end up on the user's screen. The total process to convert coordinates within a specified range to NDC that can easily be mapped to 2D view-space coordinates is called projection since the projection matrix projects 3D coordinates to the easy to-map-to-2D normalized device coordinates.

Once all the vertices are transformed to clip space a final operation called *perspective division* is performed where we divide the x, y and z components of the positions vectors by the vector's homogeneous w component; perspective division is what transforms the 4D clip space coordinates to 3D normalized device coordinates. This step is performed automatically at the end of the vertex shader step.



